Paneer Makhani

Paneer makhani is succulently cooked cottage cheese cubes in a smooth sauce of tomatoes and cream, which is lightly spiced with a hint of tang and sweetness.Prep Time
10 mins
Cook Time
35 mins
Total Time
45 mins
Cuisine
North Indian
Course:
Main Course
Diet:
Gluten Free, Vegetarian
Difficulty Level:
Moderate
Servings
3
 
Units
US Customary
Metric

Ingredients
▢200 grams Paneer (Indian cottage cheese)
▢250 grams tomatoes or 4 to 5 medium-sized
▢2 to 3 tablespoons light cream (low fat 25%) or whipping cream
▢2 tablespoons Butter
▢1 tej patta (Indian bay leaf)
▢1 teaspoon Ginger-Garlic Paste or ½ inch ginger + 3 to 4 small garlic crushed to paste in a mortar
▢½ teaspoon red chilli powder or kashmiri red chilli powder or cayenne pepper or paprika
▢1 to 2 green chillies slit or sliced
▢¼ teaspoon Garam Masala Powder or tandoori masala powder
▢½ to 1 teaspoon sugar – add as required* check notes
▢½ to 1 inch ginger – julienned
▢½ teaspoon dry fenugreek leaves – kasuri methi, crushed
▢1.5 cups water
▢salt as required



Cook Mode
Prevent your screen from going dark while making the recipe
Instructions
Making Tomato Puree
First rinse and chop the tomatoes. Use the tomatoes that are ripe with a sweet tangy taste and not overly sour.
In a blender or grinder make a smooth puree of the chopped tomatoes. No need to add any water while blending the tomatoes.

Keep the tomato puree aside.
Making Paneer Makhani
Melt butter in a pan. First add the tej patta (Indian bay leaf) and saute for a few seconds till aromatic.
Then add the crushed ginger-garlic paste and saute for a few seconds or till the raw aroma of the ginger-garlic goes away.
Add the tomato puree and stir well.
Now add the red chili powder and saute this mixture till the fat begins to leave the side of the tomato paste. Takes about 14 to 15 on a low heat. Keep on stirring often.
When you see the tomato mixture clumping together and the fat leaving the sides, then add water.
Stir and simmer till the gravy or sauce thickens a bit. Takes about 7 to 8 minutes on a low flame.

Then add the slit green chilies and ginger julienne. Stir and simmer for a minute.
Add sugar, salt as required and crushed kasuri methi (dry fenugreek leaves).
Stir and then add the paneer cubes. 
Mix gently and switch off the heat. No need to cook the paneer as then they can get hard or chewy and won't taste good.
Lastly add cream and gently stir. Switch off the flame and then sprinkle with garam masala. Give a gentle stir again.
Serve the paneer makhani with roti, naan, paratha or jeera rice or saffron rice or biryani rice or plain steamed basmati rice.